protocol-specification.md, before:

# Protocol Specification

## Introduction

In this chapter, we outline the specification for the abstract LSAT HTTP and
gRPC protocols. This is intended to be along the lines of the document we would
submit if we were submitting the LSAT HTTP/gRPC protocol to a standards
committee. For more details on the higher-level purpose and motivations behind
LSAT, please [see this chapter](introduction.md).

## Specification

This section defines the "LSAT" authentication scheme, which transmits
credentials as `<macaroon>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage and
the macaroon are each encoded as base64. This scheme is not considered to be a
secure method of user authentication unless used in conjunction with some
external secure system such as TLS, as the macaroon and preimage are passed over
the network as cleartext.

The LSAT authentication scheme is based on the model that the client needs to
authenticate itself with a macaroon and invoice preimage for each backend
service it wants to access. The server will service the request only if it can
validate the macaroon and preimage for the particular backend service requested.

The LSAT authentication scheme utilizes the Authentication Framework specified
in [*RFC 7235*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235) as follows.

In challenges: the scheme name is "LSAT". Note that the scheme name is case-
insensitive. For credentials, the syntax is:


`macaroon` → [*&lt;base64 encoding&gt;*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3548#section-3),
comma separated if multiple macaroons are present    
`preimage` → [*&lt;base64 encoding&gt;*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3548#section-3)  
`token`    → macaroon ":" preimage


Specifically, the syntax for "token" specified above is used, which can be
considered comparable to the
[*"token68" syntax*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-2.1) used for
HTTP basic auth.

### Reusing Credentials

LSATs are intended to be reused until they are revoked and the server issues a
new challenge in response to a client request containing a newly invalid LSAT.
Possible revocation conditions include: expiry date, exceeded N usages, volume
of usages in a certain time period necessitating a tier upgrade, and potentially
others (discussed further in the higher-level design document).

LSATs could be configured for use on a per-backend-service basis or for all
Lightning Labs services. I.e., it’s flexible whether an LSAT could apply to both
the Bos score API *and* a loop-in, or just one of them. This flexibility is
afforded because all services are going to be gated by the same LSAT proxy,
which verifies all macaroons for all backend services.

### Security Considerations

If a client’s LSAT is intercepted by Mallory, which possible if the transmission
is not encrypted in some way such as TLS, the LSAT can be used by Mallory and
the LSAT proxy would not be able to distinguish this usage as illicit.

LSAT authentication is also vulnerable to spoofing by counterfeit servers. If a
client slightly mistypes the URL of a desired backend service, they become
vulnerable to spoofing attacks if connecting to a server that maliciously stores
their LSAT and uses it for their own purposes. This attack could be addressed by
requiring the user of the LSAT to have a specific IP address. However, there are
downsides to this approach; for example, if a user switches WiFi networks, their
token becomes unusable.

## HTTP Specification

In this section, we specify the protocol for the HTTP portion of the LSAT proxy.

Upon receipt of a request for a URI of an LSAT-proxied backend service that
lacks credentials or contains an LSAT that is invalid or insufficient in some
way, the server should reply with a challenge using the 402 (Payment Required)
status code. **Officially, in the HTTP RFC documentation, status code 402 is **
[***"reserved for future use"***](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.2)
** -- but this document assumes the future has arrived.**

Alongside the 402 status code, the server should specify the `WWW-Authenticate`
header ([*\[RFC7235\], Section 4.1*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-4.1))
field to indicate the LSAT authentication scheme and the macaroon needed for the
client to form a complete LSAT.

For instance:

```text
 HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required

Date: Mon, 04 Feb 2014 16:50:53 GMT

WWW-Authenticate: LSAT macaroon="AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==", invoice="lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp5fu6xhthlt2vucmzkx6c7wtlh2r625r30cyjsfqhu8rsx4xpz5lwqdpa2fjkzep6yptksct5yp5hxgrrv96hx6twvusycn3qv9jx7ur5d9hkugr5dusx6cqzpgxqr23s79ruapxc4j5uskt4htly2salw4drq979d7rcela9wz02elhypmdzmzlnxuknpgfyfm86pntt8vvkvffma5qc9n50h4mvqhngadqy3ngqjcym5a"
```

where `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="` is the macaroon that the client must
include for each of its authorized requests and `"lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp..."` is
the invoice the client must pay to reveal the preimage that must be included for
each of its authorized requests.

In other words, to receive authorization, the client:

1. Pays the invoice from the server, thus revealing the invoice’s preimage
2. Constructs the LSAT by concatenating the base64-encoded macaroon(s), a single
  colon (":"), and the base64-encoded preimage.

Since the macaroon and the preimage are both base64-encoded binary data, there
should be no problem with either containing control characters or colons
(see "CTL" in
[*Appendix B.1 of \[RFC5234\]*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5234#appendix-B.1)).
If a user provides a macaroon or preimage containing any of these characters,
this is to be considered an invalid LSAT and should result in a 402 and
authentication information as specified above.

If a client wishes to send the macaroon `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="`
(already base64-encoded by the server) and the preimage `"123412341234"`, they
would use the following header field:

```text
Authorization: LSAT AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==:MTIzNDEyMzQxMjM0
```

## gRPC Protocol Specification

This section defines the "LSAT" gRPC authentication scheme, which, similarly to
the HTTP version, transmits credentials as `<macaroon>:<preimage>` pairs where
each field is encoded as base64. As above, this scheme is not considered to be a
secure method of user authentication unless used in conjunction with some
external secure system such as TLS, as the macaroon and preimage are passed over
the network as cleartext.

The LSAT proxy will determine whether an incoming HTTP request is gRPC by
checking whether the Content-Type header begins with application/grpc, therefore
gRPC clients must set this header in all requests.

Note that the LSAT proxy must be HTTP/2 compatible to accommodate requests for
gRPC backend services, since the gRPC client expects to be talking to a server
that "speaks" HTTP/2.

Upon receipt of a request for a URI of an LSAT-proxied backend service that
lacks LSAT credentials,, the server should reply with a challenge encoded in the
grpc-status-details-bin HTTP header as a serialized gRPC Status proto message,
to be deserialized on the client side. Once deserialized, the proto will look
roughly like this object:

```json
{
    code: 402,
    message: "missing LSAT",
    details: {
        type_url: "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.QuotaFailure",
        value: {
            macaroon: "<macaroon>",
            invoice: "<invoice>"
        }
    }
}
```

Note that deserialization is language-dependent. In Go, it looks something like
this:

```go
_, err := client.AccessBackendService(ctx, &pb.BackendServiceRequest{})
If err != nil {
        st, _ := status.FromError(err)
        message := st.Message() // get message
        code := st.Code() // get code
        for _, detail := range st.Details() {
                switch t := detail.(type) {
                case *errdetails.QuotaFailure:
                for _, violation := range t.GetViolations() {
                        // parse macaroon from "macaroon:&lt;mac&gt;" format
                        // parse invoice from "invoice:&lt;inv&gt;" format
…
```

Serialization is similarly language-dependent.

Depending on the context, QuotaFailure may not be the most descriptive error
message, but it fits a scenario where a user has exceeded their free
"trial period" for a backend service.

Alongside the serialized status details, the server should specify status code
`200 OK`, the `Content-Type` header, and the following trailers:
`grpc-message` and `grpc-status`.

For instance:

```text
HTTP/2 200 OK
Date: Mon, 04 Feb 2014 16:50:53 GMT
Content-Type: application/grpc
…
Grpc-Message: missing LSAT
Grpc-Status: 402
Grpc-Status-Details-Bin: CJIDEgxtaXNzaW5nIExTQVQaeQ…
```

Where `"CJIDEgxtaXNzaW5nIExTQVQaeQ…"` is the serialized gRPC status proto.

Once the client has deserialized the proto and extracted the macaroon and
invoice, they may pay the invoice and construct the LSAT identically to the
HTTP specification, i.e. by concatenating the base64-encoded macaroon, a single
colon (":"), and the base64-encoded preimage.

If a client wishes to send the macaroon `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="`
(already base64-encoded by the server) and the preimage `"123412341234"`, they
would use the following header field:

```text
Authorization: LSAT AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==:MTIzNDEyMzQxMjM0
```

Note this is the same as the HTTP specification.Other gRPC headers and trailers
are required; more information can be found in the
[*gRPC over HTTP2 specification*](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/PROTOCOL-HTTP2.md).

Commit message:

Specify multiple macaroons, fix typos

protocol-specification.md, after:

# Protocol Specification

## Introduction

In this chapter, we outline the specification for the abstract LSAT HTTP and
gRPC protocols. This is intended to be along the lines of the document we would
submit if we were submitting the LSAT HTTP/gRPC protocol to a standards
committee. For more details on the higher-level purpose and motivations behind
LSAT, please [see this chapter](introduction.md).

## Specification

This section defines the "LSAT" authentication scheme, which transmits
credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage and
the macaroon are each encoded as base64. Multiple macaroons are base64 encoded
individually and listed comma separated before the column.  
This scheme is not considered to be a secure method of user authentication
unless used in conjunction with some external secure system such as TLS, as the
macaroon and preimage are passed over the network as cleartext.

The LSAT authentication scheme is based on the model that the client needs to
authenticate itself with a macaroon and invoice preimage for each backend
service it wants to access. The server will service the request only if it can
validate the macaroon and preimage for the particular backend service requested.

The LSAT authentication scheme utilizes the Authentication Framework specified
in [*RFC 7235*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235) as follows.

In challenges: the scheme name is "LSAT". Note that the scheme name is
case-insensitive. For credentials, the syntax is:


`macaroons` → [*&lt;base64 encoding&gt;*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3548#section-3),
comma separated if multiple macaroons are present    
`preimage`  → [*&lt;base64 encoding&gt;*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3548#section-3)  
`token`     → macaroons ":" preimage


Specifically, the syntax for "token" specified above is used, which can be
considered comparable to the
[*"token68" syntax*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-2.1) used for
HTTP basic auth.

### Reusing Credentials

LSATs are intended to be reused until they are revoked and the server issues a
new challenge in response to a client request containing a newly invalid LSAT.
Possible revocation conditions include: expiry date, exceeded N usages, volume
of usages in a certain time period necessitating a tier upgrade, and potentially
others (discussed further in the higher-level design document).

LSATs could be configured for use on a per-backend-service basis or for all
Lightning Labs services. I.e., it’s flexible whether an LSAT could apply to both
the Bos score API *and* a loop-in, or just one of them. This flexibility is
afforded because all services are going to be gated by the same LSAT proxy,
which verifies all macaroons for all backend services.

### Security Considerations

If a client’s LSAT is intercepted by Mallory, which is possible if the
transmission is not encrypted in some way such as TLS, the LSAT can be used by
Mallory and the LSAT proxy would not be able to distinguish this usage as
illicit.

LSAT authentication is also vulnerable to spoofing by counterfeit servers. If a
client slightly mistypes the URL of a desired backend service, they become
vulnerable to spoofing attacks if connecting to a server that maliciously stores
their LSAT and uses it for their own purposes. This attack could be addressed by
requiring the user of the LSAT to have a specific IP address. However, there are
downsides to this approach; for example, if a user switches WiFi networks, their
token becomes unusable.

## HTTP Specification

In this section, we specify the protocol for the HTTP portion of the LSAT proxy.

Upon receipt of a request for a URI of an LSAT-proxied backend service that
lacks credentials or contains an LSAT that is invalid or insufficient in some
way, the server should reply with a challenge using the 402 (Payment Required)
status code. **Officially, in the HTTP RFC documentation, status code 402 is **
[***"reserved for future use"***](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.2)
** -- but this document assumes the future has arrived.**

Alongside the 402 status code, the server should specify the `WWW-Authenticate`
header ([*\[RFC7235\], Section 4.1*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-4.1))
field to indicate the LSAT authentication scheme and the macaroon needed for the
client to form a complete LSAT.

For instance:

```text
 HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required

Date: Mon, 04 Feb 2014 16:50:53 GMT

WWW-Authenticate: LSAT macaroon="AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==", invoice="lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp5fu6xhthlt2vucmzkx6c7wtlh2r625r30cyjsfqhu8rsx4xpz5lwqdpa2fjkzep6yptksct5yp5hxgrrv96hx6twvusycn3qv9jx7ur5d9hkugr5dusx6cqzpgxqr23s79ruapxc4j5uskt4htly2salw4drq979d7rcela9wz02elhypmdzmzlnxuknpgfyfm86pntt8vvkvffma5qc9n50h4mvqhngadqy3ngqjcym5a"
```

where `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="` is the macaroon that the client must
include for each of its authorized requests and `"lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp..."` is
the invoice the client must pay to reveal the preimage that must be included for
each of its authorized requests.

In other words, to receive authorization, the client:

1. Pays the invoice from the server, thus revealing the invoice’s preimage
2. Constructs the LSAT by concatenating the base64-encoded macaroon(s), a single
  colon (":"), and the base64-encoded preimage.

Since the macaroon and the preimage are both base64-encoded binary data, there
should be no problem with either containing control characters or colons
(see "CTL" in
[*Appendix B.1 of \[RFC5234\]*](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5234#appendix-B.1)).
If a user provides a macaroon or preimage containing any of these characters,
this is to be considered an invalid LSAT and should result in a 402 and
authentication information as specified above.

If a client wishes to send the macaroon `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="`
(already base64-encoded by the server) and the preimage `"123412341234"`, they
would use the following header field:

```text
Authorization: LSAT AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==:MTIzNDEyMzQxMjM0
```

## gRPC Protocol Specification

This section defines the "LSAT" gRPC authentication scheme, which, similarly to
the HTTP version, transmits credentials as `<macaroon>:<preimage>` pairs where
each field is encoded as base64. As above, this scheme is not considered to be a
secure method of user authentication unless used in conjunction with some
external secure system such as TLS, as the macaroon and preimage are passed over
the network as cleartext.

The LSAT proxy will determine whether an incoming HTTP request is gRPC by
checking whether the Content-Type header begins with application/grpc, therefore
gRPC clients must set this header in all requests.

Note that the LSAT proxy must be HTTP/2 compatible to accommodate requests for
gRPC backend services, since the gRPC client expects to be talking to a server
that "speaks" HTTP/2.

Upon receipt of a request for a URI of an LSAT-proxied backend service that
lacks LSAT credentials,, the server should reply with a challenge encoded in the
grpc-status-details-bin HTTP header as a serialized gRPC Status proto message,
to be deserialized on the client side. Once deserialized, the proto will look
roughly like this object:

```json
{
    code: 402,
    message: "missing LSAT",
    details: {
        type_url: "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.QuotaFailure",
        value: {
            macaroon: "<macaroon>",
            invoice: "<invoice>"
        }
    }
}
```

Note that deserialization is language-dependent. In Go, it looks something like
this:

```go
_, err := client.AccessBackendService(ctx, &pb.BackendServiceRequest{})
If err != nil {
        st, _ := status.FromError(err)
        message := st.Message() // get message
        code := st.Code() // get code
        for _, detail := range st.Details() {
                switch t := detail.(type) {
                case *errdetails.QuotaFailure:
                for _, violation := range t.GetViolations() {
                        // parse macaroon from "macaroon:&lt;mac&gt;" format
                        // parse invoice from "invoice:&lt;inv&gt;" format
…
```

Serialization is similarly language-dependent.

Depending on the context, QuotaFailure may not be the most descriptive error
message, but it fits a scenario where a user has exceeded their free
"trial period" for a backend service.

Alongside the serialized status details, the server should specify status code
`200 OK`, the `Content-Type` header, and the following trailers:
`grpc-message` and `grpc-status`.

For instance:

```text
HTTP/2 200 OK
Date: Mon, 04 Feb 2014 16:50:53 GMT
Content-Type: application/grpc
…
Grpc-Message: missing LSAT
Grpc-Status: 402
Grpc-Status-Details-Bin: CJIDEgxtaXNzaW5nIExTQVQaeQ…
```

Where `"CJIDEgxtaXNzaW5nIExTQVQaeQ…"` is the serialized gRPC status proto.

Once the client has deserialized the proto and extracted the macaroon and
invoice, they may pay the invoice and construct the LSAT identically to the
HTTP specification, i.e. by concatenating the base64-encoded macaroon, a single
colon (":"), and the base64-encoded preimage.

If a client wishes to send the macaroon `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="`
(already base64-encoded by the server) and the preimage `"123412341234"`, they
would use the following header field:

```text
Authorization: LSAT AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==:MTIzNDEyMzQxMjM0
```

Note this is the same as the HTTP specification. Other gRPC headers and trailers
are required; more information can be found in the
[*gRPC over HTTP2 specification*](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/PROTOCOL-HTTP2.md).
